Rate limit technical design (#930)
kyma-project/istio: docs/contributor/draft/rate-limit-design.md

# Rate Limit Proposal

> ## Spec 

Reviewer: Where is the `context` field in the spec?

Author: just added, thanks!

| field                                            | type        | description                                                     | required                      |
|--------------------------------------------------|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|

> | wokloadSelector                                  | object      | when skipped, it's applied for the whole namespace workloads, if empty and in istio-system ns, applies to all workloads in all namespaces | no                            |

Reviewer: I'd reuse documentation from Istio.
```suggestion
| workloadSelector                                  | object      | If omitted, the rate limit will be applied to all workload instances in the same namespace as the RateLimit CR. If the RateLimit CR is present in the istio-system namespace, it will be applied to all workloads in any namespace. | no                            |
```

> | workloadSelector.labels                          | object      | allows to select given workload by a label selector                   | no                            |

Reviewer: Why are we not reusing the expressive Istio documentation?
I think the type is not object but map<string, string>.
```suggestion
| workloadSelector.labels                          | map<string, string>      | One or more labels that indicate a specific set of pods/VMs on which the configuration should be applied. The scope of label search is restricted to the configuration namespace in which the the resource is present.                  | no                            |
```

> | local                                   | object      | allows to describe local rate limit properties                  | yes                           |

Reviewer: Should we have it as required? If we introduce global rate limiting it might not be required any longer, so we will have to change this validation once we introduce global rate limiting. If this is fine for us, we need to mention this in the decision and consequences of the ADR.

Author: As we discussed, we are ok with that, and let's add it to the ADR.

> | local.bucket                            | object      | allows to set rate limit capacity through bucket concept        | yes                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| local.bucket                            | object      | The token bucket configuration to use for rate limiting requests. Each request consumes a single token. If the token is available, the request will be allowed. If no tokens are available, the request will be rejected with status code 429.        | yes                           |
```

> | local.bucket.max_tokens                 | int         | max tokens that can be gathered for the rate limit capacity     | yes                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| local.bucket.max_tokens                 | int         | The maximum tokens that the bucket can hold. This is also the number of tokens that the bucket initially contains.  | yes                           |
```

> | local.bucket.tokens_per_fill            | int         | number of tokens added per fill cycle                           | yes                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| local.bucket.tokens_per_fill            | int         | The number of tokens added to the bucket during each fill interval.   | yes                           |
```

> | local.bucket.fill_interval              | time        | interval on which tokens are filled                             | yes                           |

Reviewer: We should also have a consequence that we have validation for the minimum fill_interval value. Documentation about this can be found here: https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/extensions/filters/http/local_ratelimit/v3/local_rate_limit.proto#local-rate-limit-proto
```suggestion
| local.bucket.fill_interval              | time        | The fill interval that tokens are added to the bucket. During each fill interval `tokens_per_fill` are added to the bucket. The bucket will never contain more than `max_tokens` tokens. The `fill_interval` must be >= 50ms to avoid too aggressive refills.                            | yes                           |
```

> | local.bucket.fill_interval              | time        | interval on which tokens are filled                             | yes                           |

Reviewer: I'm not sure if it should be duration or time? I remember that we used `duration` in APIRule v1beta1 for CORS maxAge.
```suggestion
| local.bucket.fill_interval              | duration        | interval on which tokens are filled                             | yes                           |
```

Author: done

## Usage example

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
kind: RateLimit
metadata:
  name: httpbin-local-rate-limit
  namespace: default
spec:

>   context: "gateway" | "sidecar" # translates to: PatchContext: GATEWAY | SIDECAR_INBOUND, should be on this level to not to mix sidecar level rate limit with gateway level rate limit. In such case, 2 separate resources should be created.

Reviewer: In case gateway context is set, do we do some magic to apply it automatically to `istio-system` and `ingressgateway` or do we want to be expressive? I think having less "magic" for a starter might be better. We might want to mention this in the decision.

Author: We decided to not do any magic, but to use workload selector value with context to do the validation around it

>   context: "gateway" | "sidecar" # translates to: PatchContext: GATEWAY | SIDECAR_INBOUND, should be on this level to not to mix sidecar level rate limit with gateway level rate limit. In such case, 2 separate resources should be created.

Reviewer: If this is an example we should have here context: "sidecar" and not both values.

  workloadSelector:
    labels:
      app: httpbin
  local:
    bucket:
      max_tokens: 1000
      tokens_per_fill: 1000
      fill_interval: 1s

---

> # eventually we could extend it later into such direction

Reviewer: If we have already an ideation for upcoming fields, we should also briefly mention what fields we are considering, e.g.
- **spec.local.time** to simplify configuration of buckets.
- **spec.local.additionalCriteria** ...
- ...

Author: let's remove it, as it's outside the scope

apiVersion: operator.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
kind: RateLimit
metadata:
  name: default
  namespace: kyma-system
spec:
  context: "gateway" | "sidecar" # translates to: PatchContext: GATEWAY | SIDECAR_INBOUND
  workloadSelector:
    labels:
      app: httpbin
  local:
    bucket:
      max_tokens: 1000
      tokens_per_fill: 1000
      fill_interval: 1s
    time:
      unit: "second" 
      requestsLimit: 30
    additionalCriteria:
      headerValue:
        time:
          unit: "second" 
          requestsLimit: 30
        bucket:
          max_tokens: 1000
          tokens_per_fill: 1000
          fill_interval: 1s
        headerName: "some-header"
        headerValue: "some-value"
        vhost: "some.v.host"
        route: "/some/path"
  global:
    globalSpecificSettings:
```

> Additional details:

Reviewer: Do we need this, because it should rather be mentioned in the ADR.

Author: I'll move this to the ADR

- Blocking deletion strategy for IstioCR should be extended with RateLimit CRD

> - In case of need to apply RateLimit CR to all namespaces, it should be placed in the istio-system, mimicking EnvoyFilter strategy for global application. Therefore underlying EnvoyFilter should be placed in the istio-system namespace as well. In such scenario spec.workloadSelector should not be present.

Reviewer: We should have this in the ADR as well.

Author: I'll move this to the ADR

| workloadSelector                                  | object      | If omitted, the rate limit will be applied to all workload instances in the same namespace as the RateLimit CR. If the RateLimit CR is present in the istio-system namespace, it will be applied to all workloads in any namespace. | no                            |
| workloadSelector.labels                          | map<string, string>      | One or more labels that indicate a specific set of pods/VMs on which the configuration should be applied. The scope of label search is restricted to the configuration namespace in which the the resource is present.                  | no                            |
| local                                   | object      | allows to describe local rate limit properties                  | yes                           |
| local.bucket                            | object      | The token bucket configuration to use for rate limiting requests. Each request consumes a single token. If the token is available, the request will be allowed. If no tokens are available, the request will be rejected with status code 429.        | yes                           |

> | local.bucket.max_tokens                 | int         | The maximum tokens that the bucket can hold. This is also the number of tokens that the bucket initially contains.  | yes                           |

Reviewer: I just realised that we have camel case and snake case mixed in the CR. We should only use camel case and rename `max_tokens`, `tokens_per_ fill`, ...

Author: Since IstioCR has all camelCase, I'd go with camelCase here. I think also the convention in k8s CRDs is to go with camelCase, if I'm not wrong.
